** Webex Recording: **

Webex meeting recording: BOF proposal for creation of GREEN WG creation-20240507 1602-1
Password: eJJHGeF2
Recording link: https://cisco.webex.com/cisco/ldr.php?RCID=d9d0eaed5d965b2c63344695fee89292


** Meeting Notes: **

Topic: GREEN BOF Proposal
Date: 2024-05-07
Attendees:
 Ali Rezaki Nokia
 Qin Wu
 emile.stephan@orange.com
 Giuseppe Fioccola
 Gonzalo Salgueiro
 Hesham ElBakoury
 Jari Arkko
 Jan Lindblad
 Kent Watsen
 Luis M. Contreras Telefonica
 Michael Welzl
 Mahesh Jethanandani
 Marisol Palmero Amador
 Oscar Gonzaled De Dios
 Per Andersson
 Robert Raszuk
 Rob Wilton
 Snezana Mitrovic
 Suresh Krishnan
 Tony Li
 Vishnu Pavan Beeram


Marisol introduced the agenda, provided the background of some work that
previously happened, and introduced the goal of the call: to discuss and
agree on the scope of the BOF.

Logistics: Suresh suggested using git to document and use the PR to
submit the changes. Pick proponents to review PRs and merge.

It was pointed (Michael W and Suresh) to
https://github.com/billwuqin/Green-Energy-Network/tree/main (charter
proposal), and feedback was provided that it is too wide and could use
some shrinking. There is

The scope shall be short-term, narrowed down to a set of topics that we
want to look at (also what is out of scope); with three to four clear
deliverables that can be achieved in a year or two.

Qin proposed that the charter and BOF proposal are linked, and Suresh
confirmed that is how is typically done, but with clearly identified
scope. To have the documentation in the same place (git) was agreed.

Jari provided insights on the charter text so far, and suggested
refining the scope to what is feasible short term, for example including
device and component level metrics; ICMP transport for environmental
information has too many open issues at this time to be feasible to
include immediately - it needs some work. Further, the need for a
framework needs to be evaluated, maybe starting at the device level
first.

Jan suggested the reason for having a framework at this time as we can
not assume all devices will have YANG implemented and that we will be
able to collect metrics right from it, and also the absence of the
common counters and models - and a few years to implement it (if decided
to do it). So what can be done is on the controller level and the
framework is connected to that.

Tony suggested that metrics are important, but there is more we should
be doing, putting solutions in place. Actions vs Measurements. Rob
pointed out Tony's draft around actions that can help save energy.

Ali pointed out that we need to be clear on language, we speak about
energy, metrics, efficiency, and sustainability. Need to clarify, and
then also need to identify for which use cases metrics are used. Target
levels and how to get there.

It was suggested to start the proposal from scratch and work with Qin to
identify the short limited scope keeping in mind we are in OPS
(operations) area, without changing the routing protocols, for example.

Oscar pointed out the need for discussion industry-wide about the
characterization of the devices (something along the lines of static
data), if there is power power-saving feature, idle power etc.

Rob pointed out the possible scope creep, terminology, and metrics and
suggested operator should be involved early to be able to identify what
is important. Also, document what is not in scope.

Luis also pointed some metrics may be aggregated, for that we need to
understand how we consume metrics, how to aggregate, and who the
producers and also look into other non-IT producers (like cooling) and
try to have some synchronization with the other producers to be able to
create a complete picture.

Qin pointed to other WGs work also other organizations,  avoid overlap
and reuse, and provided references.

Ali highlighted the need for use cases; reporting for compliance reasons
vs granular with intention to take action/reduce, have different
requirements for collection/observation. What is burning metric that can
help to reduce consumption and improve efficiency?

Emile brought up the topic of LCA - Lifecycle assessment, the impact of,
for example, hardware change of line card for more efficient one.
Clarification was asked are we looking into metrics that can help with
LCA or assessment itself (that seemed a bigger effort), need more
discussion on this.

Hesham seeks clarification on whether we want to keep it flexible to add
new metrics in the future. (yes)

It was concluded we need to document use cases a well as include
positioning to the e-impact program (successor, narrowed down scope?).

Key takeaways:

- The scope is to be agreed, documented, and updated via PR on GitHub.
  A new repo to be created to keep it clean.
- scope has to be limited and aimed on what is feasible to achieve in
  1-2 periods, focused on operations and not much changes into protocols
  under the jurisdiction of the other WGs (for now)
- device and component metrics are of wide interest for all, but linked
  to the specific use cases, and consequently understand the need to
  aggregate, granularity, where, how often..
- The framework seems desirable but needs some more thoughts
- The metrics shall lead to actions that can help improve efficiency
- Need to understand the other non-IT producers (such as cooling) and
  explore if sync is possible
- characterization of devices (aka. static info) seems desirable
- LCA need more discussion

Action Points:

1. Marisol and Snezana to share notes and webex recording (available now
   at: https://github.com/marisolpalmero/GREEN-bof)
2. Create BOF and WG proposals synchronously (Marisol, Qin, and Snezana.
   Who else shall be added as PR reviewer?)
3. Meet regularly until the deadline on the 24th of May
4. Discussion to take place on green-bof@ietf.org mailing list




** Webex Chat: **

Michael Welzl • There's this:
https://github.com/billwuqin/Green-Energy-Network/tree/main

Jari Arkko • I added an issue there, great start but worth maybe shrinking a bit.

Rob Wilton • I would quite like something but being able to turn on/off parts of the the system to save energy.  E.g., something along the lines of Tony's draft.  I don't know this is exactly the right model, but it seems useful.

Robert Raszuk • Rob This is very important point. But I am struggling how much of this should be local to the device vs network wide action ? Lot's of devices today reduce power usage when not needed autonomously. 

Tony Li • Robert, my draft supports both control of individual components plus autonomous control.

Robert Raszuk • Is there some place your and other drafts in this space could be found ?

Tony Li • Draft names are listed in the draft charter.

Jari Arkko • Well said, Rob 

Rob Wilton • @Robert, yes some devices will reduce power, but core routers don't seem to do this that effectively (or we could do much better).  E.g , you can get much bigger savings if you are able to move traffic off a link/NPU/LC and then power down optics/NPU/LC.

Tony Li • I beg to differ with my esteemed colleague from Cisco.

Rob Wilton • Tony, which bit?

Tony Li • Core routers actually do a good job at efficiency today. However, they lack information about anticipated traffic levels. They can do better if they are given more data. This is also listed in my draft with expected interface traffic levels.
I completely agree that powering off components is essential and that traffic engineering is the best way of accomplishing that.

Robert Raszuk • I think to start there is big difference between "power down" and move to "stand by" Shifting traffic may be pretty drastic network event involving lot's of network operational elements. Just think for example of Adj. SIDs and make before break reprogramming paradigm

Tony Li • I think that the only real difference is what the hardware supports. Legacy hardware may not have a full ASIC power-off capability but may be able to clock gate the chip. Shifting traffic through traffic-engineering techniques is very common already today. Yes, it's all done with MBB.

Robert Raszuk • Question - Is this work aiming for intradomain or interdomain or both ? Perhaps in phase 1 going to shut external facing components may be a bit too big ask. 

Michael Welzl • I agree about "ecodesign" metrics: we have mentioned some of these in our ICMP draft: e.g., there is ISO 14001:2015.

Suresh Krishnan • Robert: I agree. Personally, I am for intradomain at least initially

Rob Wilton • I would assume that deciding which components to enable/disable is going to up to the controller and operator policy.

Oscar • Not only that... It's not just policiy, the impact on other parts of the network or other components is required. So... that needs study

Tony Li • The advantage of the controller approach is that it has global scope.
Domain is no longer a meaningful term. Too many networks have gone multi-domain. Someone's marketing team has spent too long proposing bad design practices.

Robert Raszuk • To clarify ... by "interdomain" I mean outside of operators control. It could be 1 or N ASNs.

Tony Li • Inter-network traffic engineering for any purpose is still a research problem.

Robert Raszuk • Ok so we leave 1000s of external interfaces and only focus on 10s of intradomain ? Reason I am trying to clarify this as it seems important to note up front. 

Tony Li • If you have proposals, make them. Most networks have those numbers reversed.

Robert Raszuk • What I mean is not to focus on boolean ON/OFF ... but reduce power proportionally to the  effective BW used on the interfaces. 

Mahesh Jethanandani • Marisol, can you share the GitHub location where you want folks to contribute here, and on the green-bof mailing list?

Jari Arkko • Just an observation about the power on/off bit. It is a part that we need of course. But in the IETF we seem to be quite focused on only on/off. In other fields, e.g., mobile networks, significant power savings can be gained through microsleep approaches, e.g., shutting down radio power amplifiers when we know there is no traffic. I think this is due to the details of the link layers and what's possible in them. Cellular radios and fiber can be different for instance. My point is that that we should not think a single approach is sufficient. We need both microsleeps and abiilty to shut things down.

Tony Li • Microsleep seems like it's a purely internal approach. I support providing devices with more information so that they can make intelligent internal decisions.

Robert Raszuk • Well the big question is if internal approach can accomplish 80% of power reduction do we still need external ones ? 

Tony Li • We still need external ones. Component power off requires traffic engineering, which has global scope.

Robert Raszuk • But is component power off really needed if we do right with power reduction to say 95% of max power ? Sure easier said then done as requires hardware redesign ... 
Jari Spot on ! This is exactly when I was heading with my comment ... 

Qin Wu • https://github.com/billwuqin/Green-Energy-Network

Mahesh Jethanandani • Time check. We have less than 15 minutes left.

Rob Wilton • I think that we should move discussion on to who is taking actions and next steps.

Jari Arkko • Yes

Qin Wu • Agree with Ali lifecycle is targeting to broad scope which has been discussed in many other SDOs

Oscar • I think we should decouple how to use the metrics from the metrics/characterization itself... "Green Traffic Engineering" will be a topic on its own......

Rob Wilton • I still think the BOF charter is potentially looking quite long, and still think that we may want to try and scope it down.  Assuming that we are collectively able to do then is there anyone who thinks that we SHOULD NOT try and do a BOF request now for IETF 120?

Suresh Krishnan • Yep. Agree Rob. That's why I suggested starting from scratch and additively building in what we need. I am a +1 for a BoF Request for IETF 120

Ali Rezaki (Nokia) • It will be important to define the positioning of this WG w.r.t. the E-impact Program for everyone to understand the scope of each more precisely.

Suresh Krishnan • Agree Ali. I will propose some text once there is a GitHub space for the charter.

Tony Li • We should position this as the successor to e-impact.

Rob Wilton • My thinking was that e-Impact was for longer term (not yet baked) discussions and that this WG was for better understood work that we can solve now.

Mahesh Jethanandani • Yes, this time works

Tony Li • This time is awkward.

Mahesh Jethanandani • I would set up calls all the way till the deadline

Robert Raszuk • This time works fine 

Mahesh Jethanandani • Do a Doodle poll to find some good times
I have a conflict next Monday.
But subsequent Mondays should be fine
